---
title: "Policy Brief: AI, Copyright, and Productivity in the Creative Industries"
excerpt: "In this report we examine the impacts GenAI may have on the creative
  sector’s workforce and productivity. By exploring the current copyright
  landscape in the UK and US as it relates to AI, we examine the challenges
  surrounding licensing agreements, performers’ rights, transparency provisions
  on AI systems, copyright in AI outputs, and false attribution. "
report_date: 2025-02-21
cover_image: /assets/images/uploads/aicopyrightreport.png
abstract: In this report we examine the impacts GenAI may have on the creative
  sector’s workforce and productivity. By exploring the current copyright
  landscape in the UK and US as it relates to AI, we examine the challenges
  surrounding licensing agreements, performers’ rights, transparency provisions
  on AI systems, copyright in AI outputs, and false attribution. Significantly,
  we consider the Government’s proposed Text Data Mining (TDM) exemption and
  outline why opt-out frameworks are not fool-proof solutions.
links:
  - link: /assets/images/uploads/aicopyright-creativeindustries-report.pdf
    link_text: Download full report
citation_fields:
  publisher: University of Cambridge
---
This report examines the impacts GenAI may have on the creative sector’s workforce and productivity. By exploring the current copyright landscape in the UK and US as it relates to AI, we examine the challenges surrounding licensing agreements, performers’ rights, transparency provisions on AI systems, copyright in AI outputs, and false attribution. Significantly, we consider the Government’s proposed Text Data Mining (TDM) exemption and outline why opt-out frameworks are not fool-proof solutions.

## Recommendations

* Holistically examine the impact GenAI is having on the workforce in the creative industries, including by commissioning research on AI adoption across the sector, and use it to inform robust policies for supporting the sector’s workforce.
* Encourage the uptake of licensing agreements to ensure copyright holders are compensated for use of their work by AI systems, but it should also ensure that these licensing agreements fully acknowledge the rights of copyright holders and fairly compensate them for the use of their works.
* Independently ratify and adopt the Beijing Treaty on Audiovisual Performances as a first step in ensuring greater protections on performers’ rights and from false attribution by AI systems.
* Adopt transparency requirements on the training of AI systems which include the mandatory disclosure of data provenance.
* Clarify that only a human author will be afforded copyright in the outputs generated by AI models and produce guidance on: a) the threshold for ‘creative intellectual effort’ in achieving copyright in AI outputs; b) the need for recognition and compensation to artists whose name and canon are used in prompts to AI models that generate outputs; and c) measures required to avoid false attribution in AI outputs.
* We urge caution against embarking on the path of a Text and Data Mining (TDM) exemption, regardless of an ‘opt-out’ mechanism, without a robust economic analysis of the impact that it will have on the creative industries.

## Collaborative Approach

This policy brief represents a collaboration between three University of Cambridge groups:

* Bennett Institute for Public Policy
* Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy
* ai@cam
